Self-Play Pretraining with Zero Data
Aditya Cowsik 1∗ Kfir Dolev∗2 Michael Y. Li∗3 G. Bruno De Luca 4 Nourya Cohen 2
Noah D. Goodman 3 Yoav Levine 2
1Independent Researcher 2Tel Aviv University 3Stanford University 4LAPTh, USMB †
Abstract
Advances in language modeling have been driven by scaling pretraining on ever more data. Yet, the
training data is still largely curated on the model’s behalf. A more general approach to pretraining would let
the model learn to generate the data most useful for its own improvement. This would provide an effectively
unbounded source of training data, limited by compute rather than human knowledge. We introduceSelf-
Play Pretraining with Zero Data, an initial proof-of-concept towards realizing this vision. Our procedure
casts synthetic data generation as a search over the space of all computable structure, taking inspiration
from Solomonoff induction. Starting from random initialization, two models learn in tandem: a generator
proposes programs interpreted by a universal Turing machine, generating byte sequences, while a learner
autoregressively predicts these byte sequences. The learner is trained with standard cross-entropy, while
the generator is trained with reinforcement learning to produce sequences at the frontier of the learner’s
capabilities, yielding an adaptive curriculum. A universal Turing machine gives us a search space over
all computable data-generating processes, imposing little domain-specific structure, and self-play searches
over this space for useful training data. We test whether zero-shot performance on natural data improves
predictably with self-play compute; this is a clean test of transfer since neither generator nor learner is trained
on natural data. Across several natural datasets, zero-shot loss exhibits predictable scaling in compute. The
models also exhibit in-context learning, and discover recognizable mathematical sequences during training.
“By teaching, we learn.”
Seneca
“So much from so little, almost everything from almost nothing.”
John Archibald Wheeler
1 Introduction
Advances in language modeling have been driven by pretraining on Internet data. Yet, the training
data is still largely curated and constructed on the model’s behalf through large-scale data curation
efforts [Li et al., 2025, Penedo et al., 2023, Soldaini et al., 2024], data mixture design [Chen et al., 2026,
Xie et al., 2023], and hand-designed synthetic generators [Gunasekar et al., 2023, Yang et al., 2025]. A
more generic approach to pretraining would let the model itself learn to generate training data that
is most useful for its own improvement. Such an approach would extend the Bitter Lesson [Sutton,
2019] to the training data itself, minimizing hand-engineered inductive bias and creating a self-
∗Equal contribution; authors listed alphabetically. Correspondence toaditya.cowsik@gmail.com,
kfirdolev@tauex.tau.ac.il,michaelyli@stanford.edu, andbruno.deluca@lapth.cnrs.fr.
†G. Bruno De Luca, Aditya Cowsik, and Kfir Dolev began this work while affiliated with the Stanford Institute for
Theoretical Physics.
1
arXiv:2609.30063v1  [cs.AI]  24 Sep 2026
contained path to scaling, where compute alone can sustain continued improvement [Kim et al.,
2026b, Silver and Sutton].
As an initial step towards this vision, we introduce a self-play algorithm for pretraining fromzero
data. Starting from random initialization, two autoregressive transformers co-evolve: a generator
proposes programs for a minimaluniversal Turing machinewhose execution produces byte sequences,
while a learner is trained on those sequences via next-token prediction. We use a universal Turing
machine to make the space of all synthetic training data as expressive as possible while imposing
minimal domain-specific structure: any computable data-generating process can, in principle, be
represented as a program. However, the space of computable structure is enormous, and only a small
subset of programs produce sequences that are useful for the learner. Moreover, whether a sequence
is useful changes as the learner improves. This is why a self-play approach that adapts to the
learner is natural: rather than specifying useful structure in advance, we let the generator discover
which programs are most useful to the learner as training progresses. To encourage this behavior,
the generator is trained with reinforcement learning using a learning-progress reward, shifting
probability toward programs whose outputs lie near the frontier of the learner’s current capabilities.
These design choices place our approach in the lineage of classicaluniversal prediction[Bloem, 2025,
Grau-Moya et al., 2024, Hutter, 2000, Merhav and Feder, 1998, Solomonoff, 1964], which formalizes
how induction can be possible when the hypothesis class contains all computable data-generating
processes and the learner has unbounded compute: we aim at an efficient computable approximation
to universal prediction.
The resulting self-generated data is only valuable insofar as what the learner learns transfers to
natural data. Our key hypothesis is that self-play over this space of computable data-generating
processes can discover generic predictive regularities—such as copying, recursion, and hierarchical
composition—that improve prediction on natural data. Importantly, we hypothesize that these
regularities capture structure independent ofcontingent information—the particular facts, symbols, or
modality of any one dataset—that can therefore transfer across data-generating processes. Indeed,
prior work on formal, algorithmic, and non-linguistic pretraining distributions provides evidence
that such cross-distribution transfer is possible [Grau-Moya et al., 2024, Hu et al., 2025, Lee et al.,
2026, Papadimitriou and Jurafsky, 2020].
We test this hypothesis through a compute-optimal scaling law analysis. Concretely, we train
randomly-initialized transformers at various scales via self-play and evaluate the resulting learners
zero-shot on held-out datasets spanning natural language, images, speech, melodies, DNA, and
mathematical sequences. For each dataset, we construct a compute-optimal frontier over model
size, self-play rounds, and ensemble size. Across these diverse domains, a single family of self-play
models exhibits predictable power-law improvements in zero-shot loss with compute, with scaling
exponents comparable to those obtained by training directly on natural data. Importantly, this is a
clean test of transfer since we deliberately run this processtabula rasa: both models are randomly
initialized and all learner training data is generated through self-play. Thus, our experiments isolate
the effect of our self-play procedure and test whether useful predictive structure can emergeex nihilo.
We also find that the learner develops in-context learning on completely held-out tasks, and the
generator discovers known mathematical sequences.
2
Figure 1:Self-Play Pretraining with Zero Data. Starting from randomly initialized models and using
only synthetically generated data, self-play produces predictable scaling on held-out natural data.
(Top)Our procedure casts synthetic data generation as search over the space of computable structure.
A generator proposes programs, which are executed to produce byte sequences used to train a learner
by next-token prediction. The generator is trained via reinforcement learning to propose programs
near the frontier of the learner’s capabilities, measured by how strongly the learner’s gradients
align with the learner’s recent learning trajectory with respect to an AdamW-preconditioned inner
product.(Lower left)Self-play produces predictable improvements in validation loss with compute
across natural datasets. We show the compute-optimal frontier over model sizes, number of self-play
rounds, and ensemble sizes.(Lower right)The resulting learner exhibits in-context learning on
held-out tasks without any gradient updates. We report empirical success under greedy decoding
as a function of the number of in-context examples m, averaged over independently sampled task
instances.
3
2 Self-Play Pretraining with Zero Data
We introduce a self-play formulation of pretraining that involves searching over the space of
computable structure. Every training sequence is the output of a program executed on a fixed
universal Turing machine U and these programs are produced by a learned generator. Our method
has two components: (1) aLearner πθ, an autoregressive language model trained to predict program
outputs, and (2) aGenerator gϕ, an autoregressive language model defined over programs for U.
Both are transformers with the same architecture, trained fromrandom initialization; the generator
is trained via reinforcement learning (RL) and the learner is trained via next-token prediction.
Importantly, we consider thistabula rasasetup to cleanly test whether self-play can generate structure
that transfers to natural data.
Each round of self-play proceeds as follows:
1.Program generation:SampleNprograms from the generator{x i}N
i=1 ∼g ϕ.
2. Execution:Run each program on U to obtain output sequences yi =U(x i, ωi), where ωi is a
random input tape.
3. Learner and Generator update:The learner takes one gradient step on the output sequences,
optimizing the standard next-token loss. The generator takes a policy gradient step with a
learning-progressreward that encourages the generator to propose programs at the frontier of
the learner’s capabilities. In addition, the generator is updated via a supervised fine-tuning
objective on existing programs to mitigate catastrophic forgetting and on mutated programs to
promote exploration.
2.1 Program space
We would like the generator’s search space to be as expressive as possible while imposing little
domain-specific structure. We therefore use programs for a minimal universal Turing machine as
the substrate for generating synthetic data. Specifically, we use a Brainf*ck-like Turing-complete
language, following Grau-Moya et al. [2024]. Its primitive instructions manipulate a byte-valued
tape, implement loops, and read or emit bytes. Because the language is universal, any computable
data-generating process can, in principle, be represented as a program.
Let x∈ A≤L denote a program generated over the machine’s instruction alphabet. Executing x on
the universal machineUwith random input tapeωproduces a byte sequence
y=U(x, ω)∈ {0, . . . ,255}T .
The random input tape allows a single program to represent a distribution over output sequences.
These output bytes, rather than the programs themselves, constitute the learner’s training data. We
design the execution semantics so that every generated string is executable: programs cannot fail
through syntax or memory errors, and execution always produces a bounded-length output. We
defer the precise execution semantics and resource limits to Appendix E.
2.2 Objectives
Program pool.At each self-play rounde, we construct a pool of programs
Be =B fresh
e ˙∪ Bmut
e ˙∪ Breplay
e ,
containing fresh samples from the current generator, local mutations of previously high-reward
programs, and programs replayed from earlier rounds. Fresh samples provide global exploration,
4
mutations refine promising regions of program space, and replay preserves useful structures dis-
covered earlier in training. We write Me =|B e| for the number of programs in the pool. Details for
mutation, replay, and the program bank are offered in Appendix G.
Learner Update.The learner is trained by standard next-token prediction on program outputs. For
an output sequence y, define the per-sequence loss L(y;θ) as the mean cross-entropy over its content
tokens. If yi =U(x i, ωi) is the output obtained by executing program xi, the learner objective in
roundeis
Llearner(θ;B e) = 1
Me
X
i∈Be
L(yi;θ).(1)
Thus fresh, mutated, and replay programs all train the learner.
Generator Reward.The generator’s reward must be capable of identifying programs with useful
structure from programs without any external feedback. Initially, we considered a reward based
on how difficult a sequence is to predict, motivated by prior work on self-play [Bailey et al., 2026a,
Dong and Ma, 2025b]. However, this has a fundamental failure mode: a program can be made
arbitrarily difficult without containing useful structure—for example, by injecting random bytes
into an otherwise predictable sequence.
To avoid this degeneracy, we evaluate a new program based on whether it builds on what the learner
has actually been able to learn. Intuitively, the learner’s change in parameters summarizes this:
learning signals arising from reusable structure accumulate, whereas we expect that idiosyncratic
effects that are not learnable do not. Concretely, we reward the generator for producing programs
whose learner gradients align with the learner’s current learning trajectory. Let
p(e) =⌊e/2⌋, δθ e =θ p(e) −θ e,
where θp(e) is the learner checkpoint at the lookback horizon. The reward for programxi with output
yi is
ri =| ⟨∇θL(yi;θ e), Pe ⊙δθ e⟩ |,(2)
where
Pe = lr√ˆve +ϵ
is the diagonal AdamW step operator obtained from the learner’s optimizer state. We use the
lookback window of ⌈e/2⌉ so that signals which take a long time to appear can be measured. The
growing window helps average over short-term fluctuations and produce a signal which becomes
more stable as training progresses, but allows early mistakes to eventually be forgotten.
We provide some additional intuition below, but we emphasize that we selected this reward after
searching through several possibilities at small scale. Detailed analysis can be found in table 5.
Formally, this reward is a preconditioned gradient-alignment score, between the learner’s gradient
on a program’s output and the learner’s parameter movement over the lookback window, with
the diagonal AdamW preconditioner defining the inner product; we found that using this pre-
conditioning was important in line with Thrush et al. [2026]. Intuitively, this reward favors programs
that are not yet mastered, but whose structure extends what the learner has already shown it can
learn. We expect that programs that are already mastered induce nearly zero gradients, while
programs containing unrelated or unlearnable structure induce gradients that do not align with
the learner’s parameter movement. Both receive little reward. Instead, high reward is assigned to
programs that induce substantial learning, but only in directions congruent with the learner’s recent
progress; this concentrates the generator on the frontier of the learner’s current capabilities. We
5
avoid materializing full gradients by using forward mode automatic differentiation [Griewank and
Walther, 2008] to calculate Equation 2.1
Policy-Gradient RL Objective.We train the generator using a KL-regularized expected reward
JRL(ϕ) =E x∼gϕ[r(x)]−βKL(g ϕ∥g0),(3)
whereβis the KL regularization coefficient andg 0 is the fixed uniform program prior defined as
g0(x) =|A| −ℓ(x).
Here ℓ(x) is the number of tokens up to and including the terminating F. This is the natural analog
of the Solomonoff prior 2−|p| [Solomonoff, 1964], which weights programs according to description
length. The generator is initialized nearg 0 and regularized toward it throughout training.
Since the vanilla policy gradient estimator is high variance, we consider a GRPO (batch-level) based
estimator [Guo et al., 2025]. Let ¯re and σr,e denote the mean and standard deviation, respectively, of
the rewards{r i}i∈Be over the full round pool. We define the advantage of programias
Ai = ri −¯re
σr,e +ϵ −β(logg ϕ(xi)−logg 0(xi)).
Since our bank consists of off-policy samples, we use a sequence-level importance ratio correction
ρi = gϕ(xi)
gϕold,i (xi) [Zheng et al., 2025]. It is equal to one for fresh on-policy samples; for replay samples,
its denominator is the sampling probability stored when the program originally entered the replay
bank. The policy-gradient term is then
LPG(ϕ) =− 1
|Be \ Bmute |
X
i∈Be\Bmut
stopgrad(ρi) logg ϕ(xi) stopgrad(Ai).(4)
Mutation rows are excluded because they were not sampled from a proposal distribution with a
well-defined log probability. We clip the sequence-level importance ratio to ensureρi ∈[e −20, e20].
Expert Iteration.To prevent forgetting, we replay previous programs by distilling high-reward
programs back into the generator using reward-weighted supervised fine-tuning over the full pool
Be. This is a technique used to mitigate forgetting in pretraining and RL [Ibrahim et al., 2024, Schaul
et al., 2016]. We assign each program a normalized sequence-level weight
wi = [ri]+P
j∈Be
[rj]+
,[r] + ≡max(r,0),
and optimize
LEI(ϕ;B e) =−
X
i∈Be
wi logg ϕ(xi).
The generator’s full training objective is
Lgenerator(ϕ) =L PG(ϕ) +λ EI LEI(ϕ;B e),(5)
whereλ EI = 1.0controls the strength of the reward-weighted SFT term.
1Forward mode kernel implemented inhttps://github.com/amorehead/jvp_flash_attention
6
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
5
6
7
8
9loss (bits/byte)
CIFAR-10
Images
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
Mutopia
Melody
1015 1016 1017 1018
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
MusicNet 44.1 kHz
Audio
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
LibriSpeech PCM8
Speech
1015 1016 1017 1018
effective compute  C = K ×  params × tokens
4
5
6
7
8loss (bits/byte)
DCLM
Text
1015 1016 1017 1018
effective compute  C = K ×  params × tokens
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
GitHub Python
Python
1015 1016 1017 1018
effective compute  C = K ×  params × tokens
3
4
5
6
7
8
C source
C code
1015 1016 1017 1018
effective compute  C = K ×  params × tokens
4
5
6
7
8
Web text
Common Crawl
Self-Play Pretraining
with Zero Data
Pretraining on programs sampled
from a universal prior Pretrain on PCFG
Figure 2:Self-play learns predictive structure that transfers across modalities.We compare self-
play to two fixed synthetic pretraining distributions: programs sampled from a universal prior over
Brainf*ck programs and probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs). Sampling from the universal
prior scales substantially more slowly than self-play, showing that access to a universal space of
programs alone is insufficient without the adaptive curriculum. Pretraining on PCFG transfers
strongly to language-like domains, but its benefits are less consistent across non-language modalities.
In contrast, self-play exhibits predictable scaling across images, melody, audio, speech, text, and
code despite using minimal inductive bias. The compute-optimal frontier ends where we do not
find further models with smaller loss than the largest-compute model shown.
2.3 Architecture and Tokenization
The learner and generator are independently parameterized decoder-only Llama transformers with
identical architecture [Touvron et al., 2023]. We use byte-level tokenization with a fixed vocabulary
of 256 byte values because the universal machine produces raw bytes, and because it enables a clean,
modality-agnostic evaluation of universal prediction: how well the model predicts the next byte in
arbitrary sequences encoding text, images, audio, or other data. Programs and outputs are prefixed
by the bytes S and O, respectively. During program generation, logits are restricted to the eight
Brainf*ck instructions, ten canonical single-byte macro instructions, and the end-of-program token
F, whereas output sequences may contain any byte value.
3 Empirical Results
3.1 Universal zero-shot transfer scaling laws
In standard pretraining, scaling compute typically entails both increasing model size and training
the model on more natural data. Our scaling experiments study whether increasing compute via
self-play, without any natural data, produces predictable improvements in zero-shot performance
on held-out natural data.
7
Scaling recipe.We follow the scaling methodology of Kim et al. [2026b], Wen et al. [2026]. At
each model scale, we tune hyperparameters tolocal optimality, in the sense defined in Kim et al.
[2026b], via coordinate descent on a geometrically-spaced grid. Because our training objective is
entirely synthetic, it does not provide an obvious criterion for selecting hyperparameters; poorly
tuned hyperparameters could prevent clean scaling laws. We therefore use validation loss averaged
across DCLM and DNA as a model-selection signal. This introduces limited leakage through
hyperparameter selection, but natural data are never used for gradient updates.
Because tuning every possible hyperparameter at every scale is infeasible, we restrict the search
to the most important hyperparameters based on preliminary experiments: the learner learning
rate, the generator-to-learner learning-rateratio, the batch size, and the generator KL regularization
coefficient β. Due to compute constraints, we fix a large maximum training budget of 34.36B tokens
rather than separately tuning the number of self-play rounds. Because we use only a short fixed
warmup followed by a constant learning rate, every intermediate checkpoint is equivalent to a run
stopped at that token budget. Thus, a single long run allows us to optimize over training duration
retrospectively when constructing the scaling laws. When tuning batch size, we hold the total
number of training tokens fixed; when the batch size changes, the number of rounds is adjusted
accordingly to preserve the total token budget. Across all scales, we use a context length of 4096
tokens. We find that ensembling across randomly initialized models is useful. Therefore, at the
locally-optimal hyperparameters, we train K independent seeds per scale and form ensembles
averaging the models’ predictive distributions.
For each dataset and algorithm, we construct acompute-optimalfrontier [Kaplan et al., 2020] over
model sizes, checkpoints, and ensemble sizes. A point is on the frontier if and only if it achieves
lower validation loss than every observed configuration with less than or equal compute.
We fit each compute-optimal frontier with the asymptotic power law
L(C) =E+AC −α,
where L is the observed loss in bits per byte and E is a fitted asymptotic loss floor. We fit the model
independently for each dataset.
Self-play exhibits universal zero-shot power-law scaling in compute.As shown in Figure 1,
we observe scaling laws over a diverse range of modalities: text, images, and music. We present
additional results in Figure 7. The scaling laws over these modalities are broadly similar, as seen in
Table 2, (with DNA as the exceptional case). We discuss the implications of this in Section 4. In brief,
we expect this to be the case when learning universal structure rather than contingent knowledge is
the bottleneck to scaling. Importantly, these scaling results are entirely zero-shot: that is, they arise
without any gradient steps on any of the evaluation datasets.
Pretraining on a fixed universal program prior exhibits slow scaling.To isolate the value of self-
play, we compare self-play against a non-adaptive baseline over exactly the same program space; we
use the same mixture of validation loss on DCLM and DNA. Instead of learning a distribution over
programs, the baseline samples programs from a fixed Solomonoff-style prior [Solomonoff, 1964]:
instruction tokens are drawn i.i.d. until termination, giving full support to every finite program
while favoring shorter descriptions. Thus, both methods have access to the same universal space of
computable structure; they differ only in whether the sampling distribution adapts to the learner.
Figure 2 shows that fixed sampling scales substantially more slowly, demonstrating that access to a
universal program space alone is not enough—self-play must learn where in that space to allocate
training compute. We offer additional evaluation datasets in Figure 7.
8
Qualitatively, we see that self-play’s improvement is because it discovers programs whose outputs
exhibit recognizable mathematical structure (Table 1) far earlier than we would expect under uniform
sampling from the universal prior: across 1.64×10 8 programs drawn from the uniform prior, we
find no instances of any family except arithmetic sequences. Because such structures are common in
mathematical modeling, this shows that our self-play algorithm can efficiently identify universal
data, and that this is one mechanism driving the faster scaling observed in Figure 2.
Family
(mod 256) Example program Its output Earliest
round
E[first round]
(univ. prior)
ArithmeticS+[.++]1,3,5,7,9, . . .0≈105
FibonacciS,[[.C>.C>]1,1,2,3,5, . . .512>53,000
GeometricS+[.L>]1,3,9,27,81, . . .256>53,000
QuadraticS,.[<C>>VX<RX++]9,25,59,111, . . .512>53,000
CubicS+[[-.L>L>-]-]0,254,236,74, . . .512>53,000
Table 1:Program families with recognizable mathematical structure discovered by the generator
during self-play.Earliest roundgives the earliest round in which a member of the family first appears
during training, whileuniv. priorgives the expected first appearance round if programs are drawn
from the universal prior, including the added primitives. See section C for additional details.
PCFG pretraining is effective on language-like domains but lacks broad cross-domain transfer.
In Figure 2, we also compare against pretraining on probabilistic context-free grammars (PCFGs),
which provide a hand-designed source of hierarchical and compositional structure particularly well
suited for language; for details of PCFG data generation see Section H. We expect pretraining on
PCFG to be highly competitive on language-like domains, but its inductive bias is specialized to a
particular class of structure. In contrast, our self-play procedure is, in principle, universal. Consistent
with this interpretation, PCFG pretraining is stronger on text and code, where its inductive bias is
well matched, while self-play substantially outperforms it on images, music, audio, and speech.
Thus, self-play does not always match the performance of a specialized prior on domains where
that prior is particularly well suited; however, it learns structure that transfers more broadly across
modalities. We find that models trained on PCFG and the universal prior fail on our ICL evaluations
in Figure 4.
The generator produces increasingly useful training data.We next ask whether the generator
improves over the course of self-play. For each endpoint T , we construct a fixed corpus DT by
sampling 4.19M programs uniformly across 16 generator checkpoints up to T (with g0 as untrained),
and train a fresh 1M-parameter learner for one epoch on each corpus under a fixed token budget.
We evaluate each corpus by itsepiplexity—the amount of structure extractable by a compute-bounded
learner [Finzi et al., 2026]—and by zero-shot performance on held-out text, audio, and images
(Figure 3). Both improve steadily with T : later generators produce data containing more learnable
structure and yielding better transfer, indicating that self-play continually improves the quality of the
training distribution. Consistent with this, the generator also discovers recognizable mathematical
sequences far earlier than expected under the fixed universal prior (table 1).
3.2 In Context Learning
An emergent property of large language models is their ability to infer a task from examples provided
in context and apply the inferred rule to new inputs [Brown et al., 2020]. Beyond measuring held-
9
g0 g256 g512 g1, 024 g2, 048 g4, 096
Generator-training endpoint gT
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750Epiplexity  (nats ⋅ rounds)
5,001
(a)
Curriculum structure content
individual seed
off-scale seed (value shown)
mean of 8 seeds
g0 g256 g512 g1, 024 g2, 048 g4, 096
Generator-training endpoint gT
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0Val BPB
(b)
Learner OOD validation
Text
Audio
Images
mean of 4-seed subsets
±1 SD over subsets
Figure 3:Later generator checkpoints provide additional, non-redundant training value.For
each generator-training endpoint T >0 we build a fixed corpus of programs by sampling from
16 generator snapshots spaced T /16apart and ending at T ; g0 uses the untrained generator. A
1M-parameter learner is then trained from scratch on each corpus, four seeds per endpoint.(a)
Epiplexity, the excess training loss the learner accumulates before converging, grows steadily with
T : corpora written by later checkpoints contain more structure.(b)Out-of-distribution validation
BPB of 4 ensembled seeds on text, audio, and images falls with T . Together, the two panels show
that later checkpoints enrich the curriculum rather than repeating earlier material, and that this
additional data improves transfer to unseen datasets.
0 1 4 16 64 256
m  (in-context examples)
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.050
0.200
1.000exact-match accuracy
Self-play
0 1 4 16 64 256
m  (in-context examples)
Universal prior
0 1 4 16 64 256
m  (in-context examples)
PCFG
In-context learning
reverse string stack assoc sum max min
Figure 4:Comparing ICL behavior across methods.Self-play pretraining yields consistent im-
provements in ICL performance across all six tasks. In contrast, universal prior pretraining shows
little evidence of effective ICL, while PCFG pretraining performs strongly on associative recall but
transfers only weakly to the remaining tasks.
out loss, in-context learning provides a complementary test of whether self-play pretraining has
produced a model that can infer latent structure in sequences. We evaluate our learner’s performance
on several in-context learning tasks in Figure 1. We plot the empirical success rate under greedy
arg max decoding as a function of the number of in-context examples, m. Importantly, the learner
does not receive any additional gradient updates or fine-tuning. Rather, the learner must infer
10
0 1 2 4 16 64 512
Demonstrations, m
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Share of trials
Preferred
bytes
{0, 255, 1, 16}
Match context byte
Other
Low 4 bits
correct
Correct
answer
0 1 2 4 16 64 512
Demonstrations, m
5
6
7
8
Entropy (bits)
Uniform: 8 bits
a Behavioral composition
Argmax categories / 1,024 trials
b Predictive uncertainty
Mean and interquartile range
Figure 5:Interpretable ICL behavior onSUMtask. (a)Distribution over the model’s inferred
strategies as the number of ICL examples increases.(b)Predictive entropy over the same trajectory,
showing an initial loss of confidence followed by increasing certainty as the correct strategy emerges.
the latent structure underlying the sequence entirely in context. From the perspective of universal
prediction and Solomonoff induction, this is precisely the kind of behavior we would hope to emerge
after our self-play procedure. Section D contains task-specific details.
Self-play induces broad ICL where fixed synthetic pretraining does not.In Figure 4, we see that
the model can achieve almost 100% accuracy onREVERSE STRING[Delétang et al., 2023],STACK
[Delétang et al., 2023], andASSOCIATIVE RECALL[Ba et al., 2016, Graves et al., 2014] tasks after a
sufficient number of ICL examples. TheASSOCIATIVE RECALLtask shows that our model is capable
of contextual search, theREVERSE STRINGtask shows that our model is capable of dynamically
indexing, andSTACKshows that our model is capable of learning to simulate a context-free grammar.
In addition, we show that our model is capable of learning standard mathematical relations in-
context (MAX,MIN,SUM). This is a natural test given that our model has been trained on short
programs which could naturally express the application of mathematical functions. Before any
examples have been shown ( m= 0 ) the model already has a 6%-8% prediction accuracy on the
MAXandMINtasks due to its prior on copying previously produced tokens. In contrast, the models
trained on PCFG and on samples from the universal prior over programs cannot learn all of these
ICL tasks (Figure 4).
Qualitative analysis of shifting model strategies during SUM task.In Figure 5, we study the
behavior of the model on the SUM task as it receives more ICL examples. Initially, the model predicts
trivial outputs which correspond to its prior (the marginally most common bytes, indicated in dark
grey). After seeing a few examples it begins to copy previous bytes, but then loses confidence after
several overconfident but incorrect predictions, reverting to a very broad distribution; we see this
reflected in the increase in entropy in the right panel. After around 4 examples, it begins to sum the
4 low-order bits correctly and by 8 examples it begins to sum the 4 high-order bits correctly as well.
From there the model improves its confidence in its strategy andlocks inon the correct approach.
11
4 Explaining Self-Play Scaling laws via Universal Data Ansatz
Our experiments show that (1) prediction on natural data improves predictably even though the
learner does not train on any natural data and (2) the observed scaling exponents are comparable to
those obtained from standard pretraining on particular domains. We propose a simple interpretation
of these two results by separating two sources of predictive information that are ordinarily entangled
in natural data:contingent information, which is specific to the particular world or distribution that
generated the data, anduniversal predictive structure, which is shared across many data-generating
processes.
Decomposing natural-data scaling.Hoffmann et al. [2022] model loss as a function of model size
Nand natural dataset sizeDusing the ansatz
L=E+ A
N α + B
Dβ .(6)
We refine the data term by treating contingent information and universal structure as separate
resources:
L=E+ A
N α + B
Dβ
c
+ C
Dγ
u
,(7)
where Dc denotes the effective amount of contingent information available to the model and Du the
effective amount of universal predictive structure.
Explaining self-play power law scaling in compute.We first use the ansatz in Equation 7 to
understand why we might see power law scaling in self-play compute. Since our models are not
trained on natural data, contingent information is fixed as training proceeds. We absorb the third
term in Equation 7 into a dataset-specific constant E′. Only universal predictive structure generated
through self-play can grow, giving
L=E ′ + A
N α + C
(Du(T)) γ .(8)
Here we write Du(T) to indicate the amount of universal data generated via self-play at time T . If
self-play generates universal structure at a power-law rate,
Du(T)∝T η,(9)
then
L=E ′ + A
N α + C′
T γη .(10)
Thus, the ansatz directly predicts the form of the scaling law we observe: natural-data loss can
improve as a power law in the amount of self-play training data T , despite no natural data being
added during training, at the cost of a larger irreducible error2.
Comparing self-play and natural-data exponents.Now, we show that, with some additional
assumptions, the conventional one-term data-scaling law conflates gains from learning contingent
information with gains from learning universal structure. In standard pretraining, increasing the
amount of natural dataDincreases both resources. Suppose
Dc(D)∝D ν, D u(D)∝D µ.(11)
2This must be the case for finite context lengths, but is not necessarily the case when the model has an infinite context
length which it could theoretically use to learn any domain in-context.
12
Substituting into Equation (7) gives
L=E+ A
N α + B′
Dβν + C′
Dγµ .(12)
Asymptotically, the more slowly decaying of the two terms dominates, so we expect that a single
fitted data exponent recovers
βobs ≈min{βν, γµ}.(13)
We observe self-play exponents, which estimate γη, comparable to those reported for direct training
on the corresponding natural modalities (table 2). This comparison is informative because self-play,
in our setting, can improve only by increasing universal predictive structure, whereas natural data
pretraining can improve through both universal and contingent information. We cautiously interpret
this as suggesting that learning universal structure may account for an important component of the
improvements obtained by scaling natural data.
5 Related Work
Synthetic dataSince natural data is limited, synthetic data has increasingly been explored as
a promising approach. One line of work uses generation to extract more learning signal from a
fixed corpus of natural data. Synthetic continued pretraining generates diverse presentations and
connections among facts in a small source corpus, improving the efficiency with which those facts are
acquired [Yang et al., 2025]. Related approaches synthesize relationships across documents, latent
reasoning underlying observed text, or multiple transformations of individual documents [Kim
et al., 2026a, Ruan et al., 2025, Zelikman et al., 2024]. A distinct body of work asks whether useful
structure can instead be learned from synthetic data that need not encode the target corpus itself.
Pretraining on music, code, artificial languages, generic synthetic tasks, and formal languages can
transfer to natural-language prediction and linguistic generalization [Hu et al., 2025, Papadimitriou
and Jurafsky, 2020], while analogous results show transfer from procedurally generated data to
natural images [Baradad et al., 2022, Kataoka et al., 2021]. These results suggest that synthetic data
can teach predictive structure that is shared across domains. Recent approaches take a dataset
attribution approach to synthesizing post-training data end-to-end [Thrush et al., 2026]; we view
this as a complementary approach for pretraining data.
Self-playEarly work on intrinsic motivation proposed rewarding agents for learning or compres-
sion progress, thereby directing exploration toward regularities that are neither already mastered nor
currently unlearnable [Schmidhuber, 2008]. Related work on automatic curriculum and open-ended
learning similarly constructs tasks that remain near the learner’s frontier [Schmidhuber, 2012]. More
recently, self-play has been applied to language models in formal math [Bailey et al., 2026b, Dong
and Ma, 2025a, Dong et al., 2024, Poesia et al., 2024], reasoning [Chen et al., 2025, Liu et al., 2026, Zhao
et al., 2025], coding [Choi et al., 2026, Wang et al., 2026], and agentic tool use [Acikgoz et al., 2026,
Zhou et al., 2025]. In contrast, we focus on pretraining with the scientific goal of establishing whether
self-play can be used to discover training distributions whose structure transfers to prediction on
completely unseen natural data. Moreover, for a clean analysis, our generator and learner begin
from scratch, while most previous work, with the exception of Poesia et al. [2024], uses pretrained
language models.
Universal prediction and algorithmic pretrainingUniversal prediction provides a theoretical
framework for understanding when prediction over arbitrary computable data-generating processes
is possible [Merhav and Feder, 1998, Solomonoff, 1964]. Most relevant to our work are Grau-Moya
13
et al. [2024] and Bloem [2025]. Grau-Moya et al. [2024] show that neural networks can amortize
universal prediction by training on outputs of programs sampled from a universal Turing machine,
and demonstrate transfer to held-out algorithmic processes. We instead learn the program distribu-
tion jointly with the learner, rewarding programs according to the learning progress they induce.
Closest empirically to our setting, Bloem [2025] provides evidence foruniversal pretrainingfrom zero
natural data, showing that training on sequences produced by iterated random computation yields
improving zero-shot prediction on unseen real-world data with model scale and can accelerate
subsequent finetuning. Our work builds on this direction by making the data-generating distribution
adaptive: we formulate program generation as an RL problem and reward programs according to
the learning progress they induce in the learner. This yields a learned curriculum that co-evolves
with the learner. Empirically, we demonstrate transfer on a broader suite of held-out natural datasets
and explicitly fit and analyze scaling laws for performance under self-play pretraining.
EpiplexityFinzi et al. [2026] formalize a measure of the amount of structured information in data
relative to a compute-bounded observer, which is necessary because unbounded notions such as
entropy and Kolmogorov complexity fail to capture emergent structure. For example, for AlphaZero,
the Kolmogorov complexity of its output is upper bounded by the length of the program that
generated it, while the resulting model is vastly larger, since it stores what that program learned
along the way in the weights of a neural network, amortizing inference. Just as Go can be decided
with brute-force search, our setting can be trivially solved by an unbounded-compute agent via
Solomonoff induction; only at finite compute does searching for useful recurring patterns ahead
of time become necessary. We use epiplexity as a measure to check that our generator’s output
increases in quality (see fig. 3). Furthermore, such a notion of structure offers a potential theoretical
basis for the design of universal reward functions.
6 Discussion
Our results show that predictable improvements in next-token prediction on natural data can emerge
even when no natural data is used for training. This provides evidence that some of the structure
ordinarily acquired through standard pretraining on natural data is beneficial because it teaches
the model universal predictive regularities. At the same time, universal pretraining cannot recover
contingent information: facts about a particular world must ultimately enter through interaction
with that world. Therefore, we do not view universal pretraining as a replacement for natural
data, but as a way to isolate universal structure and study whether that component can instead be
generated from compute.
Implications on synthetic data.The decomposition in Equation (7) provides a useful way to
interpret recent approaches to synthetic data. Some methods generate abstract, formal, procedural,
or otherwise domain-independent data whose primary value is to expose the model to transferable
structure [Hu et al., 2025, Papadimitriou and Jurafsky, 2020]. These methods can be understood
as increasing the effective supply of universal data, Du. Other methods begin with a fixed natural
corpus and generate new presentations [Yang et al., 2025], relations, or latent reasoning traces
from it [Kim et al., 2026a, Ruan et al., 2025, Zelikman et al., 2024]. Such methods can instead
improve the efficiency with which information already present in the natural corpus is acquired,
effectively increasing the useful supply of Dc; in practice, the chain-of-thought based methods may
also expose additional reusable structure and therefore also affect Du. This perspective offers an
explanation for why synthetic data can improve pretraining even when the data is not from the
same distribution as the target distribution of natural language. If universal structure is a limiting
14
resource, then generating additional structured experience can improve prediction despite bearing
little surface resemblance to the target distribution. If contingent information is limiting, synthetic
transformations of a fixed corpus can increase the amount of learning signal extracted from each
observation. Our results demonstrate an extreme point in this design space: Dc is held fixed at zero
during training, while the learning system is allowed to spend increasing compute searching for Du.
Whytabula rasa?Ourtabula rasasetting is intended as a controlled scientific experiment rather
than necessarily the most practical way to pretrain a model. Since the learner and generator are
randomly initialized, any transfer to natural data must have been acquired through the self-play
process. In practice, there is no requirement that self-play begin from scratch. The key question is
whether self-generated experience can continue expanding the frontier after naturally available data
has become expensive, redundant, or exhausted. Our results suggest that this possibility is worth
studying: if an adaptive curriculum can bootstrap transferable structure from random initialization,
then the same mechanism may also be useful when initialized from a non-random learner. This
could make our self-play algorithm complementary to standard pretraining.
Future DirectionsThe experiments reported here are confined to models below 25M parameters
at a 4K context, and the most immediate question is whether these results persist for larger models.
Achieving this may require a more expressive programming language, allowing reusable abstrac-
tions to co-evolve with the generator, alongside other modifications that improve program search
efficiency and overall scalability. Future work could also test whether the discovered mathematical
structures causally contribute to transfer through circuit analysis or curriculum ablations.
7 Acknowledgments
We especially thank Suhas Kotha and Marvin Li for detailed feedback on an earlier draft of the paper.
We thank Xiao-Liang Qi for valuable discussions at the inception of this project. Kfir Dolev was
supported by the Long Term Future Fund and later by the Zuckerman STEM leadership program.
References
Emre Can Acikgoz, Cheng Qian, Jonas Hübotter, Heng Ji, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, and Gokhan Tur.
Tool-r0: Self-evolving llm agents for tool-learning from zero data, 2026. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2602.21320.
Armen Aghajanyan, Lili Yu, Alexis Conneau, Wei-Ning Hsu, Karen Hambardzumyan, Susan Zhang,
Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Omer Levy, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Scaling laws for generative
mixed-modal language models. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 265–279.
PMLR, 2023.
AITDCC. Algorithmic information theory data compression challenge official
data archive. https://github.com/AITDCC/aitdcc.github.io/tree/
16887f9d68f273503eddb69e0c29aa7b4f39ba7a. data/data.zip, member data/B,
GitHub repository, commit16887f9d68f273503eddb69e0c29aa7b4f39ba7a.
Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z. Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. Using fast weights
to attend to the recent past. InProceedings of the 30th International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, NIPS’16, page 4338–4346, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2016. Curran Associates Inc.
ISBN 9781510838819.
15
Luke Bailey, Kaiyue Wen, Kefan Dong, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Tengyu Ma. Scaling self-play with
self-guidance, 2026a. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2604.20209.
Luke Bailey, Kaiyue Wen, Kefan Dong, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Tengyu Ma. Scaling self-play with
self-guidance, 2026b. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2604.20209.
Manel Baradad, Jonas Wulff, Tongzhou Wang, Phillip Isola, and Antonio Torralba. Learning to see
by looking at noise, 2022. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2106.05963.
Peter Bloem. Universal pre-training by iterated random computation, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2506.20057.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners.Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Lili Chen, Mihir Prabhudesai, Katerina Fragkiadaki, Hao Liu, and Deepak Pathak. Self-questioning
language models, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2508.03682.
Mayee F. Chen, Tyler Murray, David Heineman, Matt Jordan, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Christopher Ré,
Luca Soldaini, and Kyle Lo. Olmix: A framework for data mixing throughout lm development,
2026. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2602.12237.
Caroline Choi, Zeyneb Kaya, Shirley Wu, Tengyu Ma, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Ludwig Schmidt.
Anchored self-play for code repair, 2026. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2607.03523.
Mutopia Project contributors. The mutopia project. URL https://www.mutopiaproject.org/.
Santiago Cuervo and Ricard Marxer. Scaling properties of speech language models. InProceedings of
the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 351–361, 2024.
Grégoire Delétang, Anian Ruoss, Jordi Grau-Moya, Tim Genewein, Li Kevin Wenliang, Elliot Catt,
Chris Cundy, Marcus Hutter, Shane Legg, Joel Veness, and Pedro A. Ortega. Neural networks and
the chomsky hierarchy, 2023. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2207.02098.
Kefan Dong and Tengyu Ma. Stp: Self-play llm theorem provers with iterative conjecturing and
proving, 2025a. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2502.00212.
Kefan Dong and Tengyu Ma. STP: Self-play LLM theorem provers with iterative conjecturing and
proving. In Aarti Singh, Maryam Fazel, Daniel Hsu, Simon Lacoste-Julien, Felix Berkenkamp,
Tegan Maharaj, Kiri Wagstaff, and Jerry Zhu, editors,Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 267 ofProceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 14114–14136.
PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025b. URLhttps://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/dong25h.html.
Kefan Dong, Arvind Mahankali, and Tengyu Ma. Formal theorem proving by rewarding llms to
decompose proofs hierarchically, 2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2411.01829.
Marc Finzi, Shikai Qiu, Yiding Jiang, Pavel Izmailov, J. Zico Kolter, and Andrew Gordon Wilson.
From entropy to epiplexity: Rethinking information for computationally bounded intelligence,
2026. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03220.
Jordi Grau-Moya, Tim Genewein, Marcus Hutter, Laurent Orseau, Grégoire Delétang, Elliot Catt,
Anian Ruoss, Li Kevin Wenliang, Christopher Mattern, Matthew Aitchison, and Joel Veness.
Learning universal predictors, 2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2401.14953.
16
Alex Graves, Greg Wayne, and Ivo Danihelka. Neural turing machines. 2014. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1410.5401.
A. Griewank and A. Walther.Evaluating Derivatives: Principles and Techniques of Algorithmic Dif-
ferentiation, Second Edition. Other Titles in Applied Mathematics. Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics (SIAM, 3600 Market Street, Floor 6, Philadelphia, PA 19104), 2008. ISBN
9780898717761. URLhttps://books.google.com/books?id=xoiiLaRxcbEC.
Suriya Gunasekar, Yi Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Caio César Teodoro Mendes, Allie Del Giorno, Sivakanth
Gopi, Mojan Javaheripi, Piero Kauffmann, Gustavo de Rosa, Olli Saarikivi, Adil Salim, Shital Shah,
Harkirat Singh Behl, Xin Wang, Sébastien Bubeck, Ronen Eldan, Adam Tauman Kalai, Yin Tat
Lee, and Yuanzhi Li. Textbooks are all you need, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.
11644.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu
Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, Xiaokang Zhang, Xingkai Yu, Yu Wu, Z. F. Wu, Zhibin Gou, Zhihong
Shao, Zhuoshu Li, Ziyi Gao, Aixin Liu, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Bei Feng, Chengda
Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji, Erhang
Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang,
Hanwei Xu, Honghui Ding, Huazuo Gao, Hui Qu, Hui Li, Jianzhong Guo, Jiashi Li, Jingchang
Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Jinhao Tu, Junjie Qiu, Junlong Li, J. L. Cai, Jiaqi Ni, Jian Liang, Jin Chen, Kai
Dong, Kai Hu, Kaichao You, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong
Zhang, Liang Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua
Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingxu Zhou, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan
Huang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe
Pan, Runji Wang, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruyi Chen, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang
Chen, Shengfeng Ye, Shiyu Wang, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, S. S. Li, Shuang
Zhou, Shaoqing Wu, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, T. Wang, Wangding Zeng, Wen Liu, Wenfeng
Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang, W. L. Xiao, Wei An, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang,
Xiaokang Chen, Xiaotao Nie, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan
Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaosha Chen, Xiaowen Sun,
Xiaoxiang Wang, Xinnan Song, Xinyi Zhou, Xianzu Wang, Xinxia Shan, Y. K. Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X.
Wei, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu, Yichao Zhang,
Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying He, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu,
Yongqiang Guo, Yuan Ou, Yuduan Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yunfan Xiong, Yuxiang
Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Y. X. Zhu, Yanping Huang, Yaohui Li, Yi Zheng,
Yuchen Zhu, Yunxian Ma, Ying Tang, Yukun Zha, Yuting Yan, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha,
Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhiyu
Wu, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Zizheng Pan, Zhen Huang,
Zhipeng Xu, Zhongyu Zhang, and Zhen Zhang. Deepseek-r1 incentivizes reasoning in llms
through reinforcement learning.Nature, 645(8081):633–638, September 2025. ISSN 1476-4687. doi:
10.1038/s41586-025-09422-z. URLhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41586-025-09422-z.
Tom Henighan, Jared Kaplan, Mor Katz, Mark Chen, Christopher Hesse, Jacob Jackson, Heewoo Jun,
Tom B. Brown, Prafulla Dhariwal, Scott Gray, Chris Hallacy, Benjamin Mann, Alec Radford, Aditya
Ramesh, Nick Ryder, Daniel M. Ziegler, John Schulman, Dario Amodei, and Sam McCandlish.
Scaling laws for autoregressive generative modeling, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2010.14701.
17
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Ruther-
ford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan,
Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon
Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre. Training
compute-optimal large language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.15556.
Michael Y Hu, Jackson Petty, Chuan Shi, William Merrill, and Tal Linzen. Between circuits and
chomsky: Pre-pretraining on formal languages imparts linguistic biases. InProceedings of the
63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
9691–9709, 2025.
Marcus Hutter. A theory of universal artificial intelligence based on algorithmic complexity, 2000.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0004001.
Adam Ibrahim, Benjamin Thérien, Kshitij Gupta, Mats L. Richter, Quentin Anthony, Timothée Lesort,
Eugene Belilovsky, and Irina Rish. Simple and scalable strategies to continually pre-train large
language models, 2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2403.08763.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott
Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Hirokatsu Kataoka, Kazushige Okayasu, Asato Matsumoto, Eisuke Yamagata, Ryosuke Yamada,
Nakamasa Inoue, Akio Nakamura, and Yutaka Satoh. Pre-training without natural images, 2021.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2101.08515.
Konwoo Kim, Suhas Kotha, Yejin Choi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Nick Haber, and Percy Liang. Data-
efficient pre-training by scaling synthetic megadocs, 2026a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2603.18534.
Konwoo Kim, Suhas Kotha, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Pre-training under infinite
compute. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2026, pages 74596–74636,
2026b.
Dan Lee, Seungwook Han, Akarsh Kumar, and Pulkit Agrawal. Training language models via
neural cellular automata, 2026. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2603.10055.
Jeffrey Li, Alex Fang, Georgios Smyrnis, Maor Ivgi, Matt Jordan, Samir Gadre, Hritik Bansal, Etash
Guha, Sedrick Keh, Kushal Arora, Saurabh Garg, Rui Xin, Niklas Muennighoff, Reinhard Heckel,
Jean Mercat, Mayee Chen, Suchin Gururangan, Mitchell Wortsman, Alon Albalak, Yonatan Bitton,
Marianna Nezhurina, Amro Abbas, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Dhruba Ghosh, Josh Gardner, Maciej Kilian,
Hanlin Zhang, Rulin Shao, Sarah Pratt, Sunny Sanyal, Gabriel Ilharco, Giannis Daras, Kalyani
Marathe, Aaron Gokaslan, Jieyu Zhang, Khyathi Chandu, Thao Nguyen, Igor Vasiljevic, Sham
Kakade, Shuran Song, Sujay Sanghavi, Fartash Faghri, Sewoong Oh, Luke Zettlemoyer, Kyle Lo,
Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Hadi Pouransari, Alexander Toshev, Stephanie Wang, Dirk Groeneveld, Luca
Soldaini, Pang Wei Koh, Jenia Jitsev, Thomas Kollar, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Yair Carmon, Achal
Dave, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Datacomp-lm: In search of the next generation of
training sets for language models, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11794.
Bo Liu, Simon Yu, Yiding Jiang, Ao Qu, Andrew Zhao, Zichen Liu, Junsu Kim, Zijian Zhou, Seungone
Kim, Tongzheng Ren, Mickel Liu, Hanfei Yu, Zhaorun Chen, Weiyan Shi, Paul Pu Liang, Luke
Zettlemoyer, Yejin Choi, and Natasha Jaques. Spade: Self-play in adaptive synthetic executable
environments, 2026. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2608.19197.
18
N. Merhav and M. Feder. Universal prediction.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 44(6):
2124–2147, 1998. doi: 10.1109/18.720534.
Metamath contributors. set.mm: Metamath proof database. https://github.com/metamath/
set.mm/tree/bcfef9892b6103ba9046bf683b4903d2ad081a41. GitHub repository, com-
mitbcfef9892b6103ba9046bf683b4903d2ad081a41.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites, 2015. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1504.04909.
NCBI. Homo sapiens genome assembly GRCh38. NCBI Datasets. URL https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/GCF_000001405.26/. RefSeq assembly accession
GCF_000001405.26.
Isabel Papadimitriou and Dan Jurafsky. Learning music helps you read: Using transfer to study
linguistic structure in language models. InProceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 6829–6839, 2020.
Guilherme Penedo, Quentin Malartic, Daniel Hesslow, Ruxandra Cojocaru, Alessandro Cappelli,
Hamza Alobeidli, Baptiste Pannier, Ebtesam Almazrouei, and Julien Launay. The refinedweb
dataset for falcon llm: Outperforming curated corpora with web data, and web data only, 2023.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01116.
Gabriel Poesia, David Broman, Nick Haber, and Noah D. Goodman. Learning formal mathematics
from intrinsic motivation, 2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2407.00695.
Yangjun Ruan, Neil Band, Chris J. Maddison, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Reasoning to learn from
latent thoughts, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18866.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay, 2016.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05952.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Driven by compression progress: A simple principle explains essential aspects
of subjective beauty, novelty, surprise, interestingness, attention, curiosity, creativity, art, science,
music, jokes. InWorkshop on anticipatory behavior in adaptive learning systems, pages 48–76. Springer,
2008.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Powerplay: Training an increasingly general problem solver by continually
searching for the simplest still unsolvable problem, 2012. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1112.5309.
Arnav Shah, Junzhe Li, Parsa Idehpour, Adibvafa Fallahpour, Brandon Wang, Sukjun Hwang,
Bo Wang, Patrick D. Hsu, Hani Goodarzi, and Albert Gu. dnahnet: A scalable and hierarchical
foundation model for genomic sequence learning, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.
10603.
David Silver and Richard Sutton. Welcome to the era of experience.
Luca Soldaini, Rodney Kinney, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk, David Atkinson, Russell Authur,
Ben Bogin, Khyathi Chandu, Jennifer Dumas, Yanai Elazar, Valentin Hofmann, Ananya Harsh
Jha, Sachin Kumar, Li Lucy, Xinxi Lyu, Nathan Lambert, Ian Magnusson, Jacob Morrison, Niklas
Muennighoff, Aakanksha Naik, Crystal Nam, Matthew E. Peters, Abhilasha Ravichander, Kyle
Richardson, Zejiang Shen, Emma Strubell, Nishant Subramani, Oyvind Tafjord, Pete Walsh, Luke
19
Zettlemoyer, Noah A. Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Iz Beltagy, Dirk Groeneveld, Jesse Dodge, and
Kyle Lo. Dolma: an open corpus of three trillion tokens for language model pretraining research,
2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2402.00159.
Ray J Solomonoff. A formal theory of inductive inference. part i.Information and control, 7(1):1–22,
1964.
Richard S. Sutton. The bitter lesson. Incomplete Ideas (blog), 2019. URL http://www.
incompleteideas.net/IncIdeas/BitterLesson.html.
Tristan Thrush, Sung Min Park, Herman Brunborg, Luke Bailey, Marcel Rød, Neil Band, Christopher
Potts, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Synthetic data for any differentiable target. InThird Conference on
Language Modeling, 2026. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=Iudff0keb0.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée
Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand
Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
models, 2023. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971.
Aozhe Wang, Yuchen Yan, Nan Zhou, Zhengxi Lu, Weiming Lu, Jun Xiao, Yueting Zhuang, and
Yongliang Shen. Code-a1: Adversarial evolving of code llm and test llm via reinforcement learning,
2026. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2603.15611.
Kaiyue Wen, David Leo Wright Hall, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Fantastic pretraining optimizers
and where to find them. InThe Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=2J51qUZ0iG.
Sang Michael Xie, Hieu Pham, Xuanyi Dong, Nan Du, Hanxiao Liu, Yifeng Lu, Percy Liang, Quoc V .
Le, Tengyu Ma, and Adams Wei Yu. Doremi: Optimizing data mixtures speeds up language model
pretraining, 2023. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10429.
Zitong Yang, Neil Band, Shuangping Li, Emmanuel Candes, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Synthetic
continued pretraining. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages
44379–44421, 2025.
Ori Yoran, Kunhao Zheng, Fabian Gloeckle, Jonas Gehring, Gabriel Synnaeve, and Taco Cohen.
The kolmogorov test: compression by code generation. InInternational Conference on Learning
Representations, volume 2025, pages 87896–87926, 2025.
Eric Zelikman, Georges Harik, Yijia Shao, Varuna Jayasiri, Nick Haber, and Noah D. Goodman.
Quiet-star: Language models can teach themselves to think before speaking, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2403.09629.
Andrew Zhao, Yiran Wu, Yang Yue, Tong Wu, Quentin Xu, Yang Yue, Matthieu Lin, Shenzhi Wang,
Qingyun Wu, Zilong Zheng, and Gao Huang. Absolute zero: Reinforced self-play reasoning with
zero data, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03335.
Chujie Zheng, Shixuan Liu, Mingze Li, Xiong-Hui Chen, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Kai Dang, Yuqiong
Liu, Rui Men, An Yang, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Group sequence policy optimization,
2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2507.18071.
Yifei Zhou, Sergey Levine, Jason E Weston, Xian Li, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Self-challenging
language model agents. InThe Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2025. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=9yusqX9DpR.
20
Modality / dataset OursbLiteraturebRef.
Text
text (dclm)0.123 0.048–0.099 † Aghajanyan et al. [2023], Henighan et al. [2020]
Images
CIFAR-10 (HWC interl.)0.066
CIFAR-10 image bytes0.145 0.065 †–0.10Aghajanyan et al. [2023]; Henighan et al. [2020]
Audio / speech
audio 16-bit PCM0.141
audio 8-bit PCM0.260 0.12 †–0.14† Aghajanyan et al. [2023], Cuervo and Marxer [2024]
MIDI (Mutopia, 16th note grid)0.249–
Math / formal
Metamath set.mm0.129 0.17Henighan et al. [2020]
Biological sequences
DNA (8-symbol)0.435 0.01–0.06Shah et al. [2026]
Code
AITDCC C source0.116 0.17 † Aghajanyan et al. [2023]
Python source (GitHub)0.113
Table 2: Per-modality compute exponentsb from fits L(C) =A C−b +E . Values marked † are derived
from published Chinchilla-form fits viab=αβ/(α+β) under the compute-optimal allocation. Where
a range is given, values correspond to the citations in order. Dashes indicate that the authors could
not find a published exponent for that modality. Exponents from SP are broadly similar to exponents
from pre-training on the literature, if a bit higher. A detailed description and an illustration of the
datasets can be found in section B
A Additional experimental results
A.1 Pre-Pretraining with Self-Play Accelerates Pretraining on Natural Data
Our scaling results show that self-play produces transferable structure; a natural follow-up question
is whether that structure remains useful once natural data becomes available. We therefore treat self-
play aspre-pretraining[Hu et al., 2025]: a learner produced by self-play is used as the initialization
for ordinary pretraining on natural data, and we compare it against the same architecture pretrained
from random initialization.
Setup.We compare downstream pretraining of a 24.4M-parameter model from two initializations:
random weights (“from scratch”) and the final self-play checkpoint (“self-play warm start”). We
evaluate both on DCLM text, CIFAR-10 images, and ESC-50 audio, using the same fixed natural-data
corpus for each modality. Both methods are trained to convergence, with learning rate and weight
decay tuned separately for each.
ResultsFigure 6 shows that self-play pre-pretraining accelerates downstream training across
all three modalities. The warm-start models start with a lower loss than random initialization,
as expected, and retain an advantage throughout training, reaching a low validation-loss level
with fewer natural-data tokens. The savings are substantial on ESC-50 ( 320M vs. 496M tokens)
and CIFAR-10 (421M vs. 588M). By the end of our training protocol, the loss gap has narrowed
21
0 10 100
T okens (M)
2
4
6
8Val BPB
DCLM (text)
0 10 100
T okens (M)
4
6
8
CIFAR-10 (images)
0 10 100
T okens (M)
4
6
8
ESC-50 (audio)
From scratch Self-play warm start Convergence (mean ± range)
Figure 6:Self-play pre-pretraining accelerates pretraining on natural data.Validation BPB during
pretraining of a 24.4M model on three byte-encoded modalities, from random initialization (blue)
and from the final self-play checkpoint (orange), at each arm’s best hyperparameters (mean over
4 seeds; shaded band spans the seed range). The leftmost point (marked 0) is the validation loss
before any natural-data training — for the warm start, its zero-shot transfer — and the token axis is
logarithmic from the first evaluation onward. Open markers show the mean tokens consumed at
convergence, with horizontal bars spanning the seed range (markers vertically offset for legibility);
Throughout training, the warm start reaches every loss level first.
considerably, indicating that the clearest benefit of self-play pre-pretraining is accelerated learning
from natural data.
A.2 Pre-pretraining details
After the validation split, the training corpora contain approximately 255M (DCLM), 146M (CIFAR-
10), and 152M (ESC-50) tokens, and runs repeat this data over epochs, terminating at approximate
convergence. The learning rate is held constant until validation BPB plateaus (improvement <0.005
for 5 consecutive evaluations), then decayed to zero over a 200-step cosine schedule; we report the
converged BPB, the validation loss after this final decay. Learning rate and weight decay are tuned
separately for each arm, fromLR∈ {10−3,3×10 −3,10 −2} and WD∈ {0.0,0.1,0.3,0.8} with 4 seeds
per configuration; per arm we select the configuration with the lowest mean converged BPB across
seeds. We do not count the compute spent on self-play pre-pretraining itself in this comparison: it is
a one-time cost that amortizes across downstream training runs — here, a single self-play checkpoint
initializes the warm arm on all three modalities — in the same way that a pretrained checkpoint is
reused across many fine-tuning tasks.
22
1015 1016 1017 1018
4
5
6
7
8loss (bits/byte)
DCLM
1015 1016 1017 1018
4
5
6
7
8
Common Crawl
1015 1016 1017 1018
4
5
6
7
8
Kolmogorov text
1015 1016 1017 1018
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0loss (bits/byte)
GitHub Python
1015 1016 1017 1018
3
4
5
6
7
8
C source
1015 1016 1017 1018
3
4
5
6
7
8
Metamath
1015 1016 1017 1018
3
4
5
6
7
8
arXiv math
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0loss (bits/byte)
Speech Commands 16 kHz
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
Speech Commands 8 kHz
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
LibriSpeech PCM8
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
5
6
7
8
9
LibriSpeech PCM16
1015 1016 1017 1018
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0loss (bits/byte)
ESC-50 44.1 kHz
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
3
4
5
6
7
8
ESC-50 11 kHz
1015 1016 1017 1018
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
MusicNet 44.1 kHz
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
3
4
5
6
7
8
MusicNet 11 kHz
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
5
6
7
8
9loss (bits/byte)
CIFAR-10 HWC
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
6
7
8
9
CIFAR-10 planar
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
Mutopia melody
1015 1016 1017 1018
2.5
3.0
4.0
Kolmogorov DNA
1015 1016 1017 1018 1019
C = K ×  params × tokens
8
9loss (bits/byte)
glibc rand
1015 1016 1017 1018
C = K ×  params × tokens
0.05
0.10
0.25
0.50
1.00
2.00
4.00
8.00
Arithmetic
TextCode & formalSpeech audioSound & music audioVision, melody & DNABinary, numeric & synthetic
Self-Play Pretraining
with Zero Data
Pretraining on programs sampled
from a universal prior Pretrain on PCFG
Figure 7:Scaling laws across all evaluation datasets.
B Benchmark details
Here we collect more details on the benchmarks. To test the ability of the model to predict intrinsically
different kinds of "natural" sequences, we designed a diverse set of benchmarks generated by
different processes. Regardless of the provenance, they share the same interface, obtained by
encoding them as byte sequences.
B.1 Natural text
To construct this benchmark, we used DCLM-Baseline-1.0, a filtered collection of web text extracted
from Common Crawl. Explicitly, we sampled the ten global DCLM shards so that the benchmark did
23
not come from only one part of the collection. Each DCLM record is stored in a JSON container, but
the benchmark retains only its text field. We encode this text directly as UTF-8 bytes, concatenate the
document texts within each shard, and divide the result into fixed windows for next-byte prediction.
The predictor therefore has to exploit regularities such as spelling, punctuation, word structure, and
local syntax through the same byte interface used for every other benchmark.
UTF-8 - 1 cell = 1 byte
text
byte
T
h
e
·
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
·
i
s
·
m
u
t
u
a
l
;
·
84
104
101
32
112
114
111
99
101
115
115
32
105
115
32
109
117
116
117
97
108
59
32
text
byte
f
o
r
·
m
e
n
·
l
e
a
r
n
·
w
h
i
l
e
·
102
111
114
32
109
101
110
32
108
101
97
114
110
32
119
104
105
108
101
32
text
byte
t
h
e
y
·
t
e
a
c
h
.
116
104
101
121
32
116
101
97
99
104
46
spaces shown as ·  |  decimal UTF-8 byte values
Figure 8: Illustration of the natural-text encoding for an illustrative ASCII excerpt. Each cell shows
one decimal UTF-8 byte; middle dots mark spaces (byte 32).
B.2 Natural images
To construct this benchmark, we used the official CIFAR-10 test batch. It contains 32×32 color
images, each paired with one of ten class labels. Since our task is next-byte prediction rather than
classification, we remove the labels and retain only the unsigned 8-bit RGB pixel values. We also
exclude filenames, image headers, compression, and other metadata, so the predictor sees the
common byte interface.
A two-dimensional image must still be arranged as a one-dimensional byte sequence. We included
two lossless encodings of exactly the same images. The planar (CHW) encoding traverses each
image row by row, storing all red values, then all green, and then all blue. The interleaved (HWC)
encoding uses the same pixel order but places each pixel’s R, G, and B values next to one another.
We considered both encodings to check whether this one dimensional ordering made a difference to
next-byte prediction performance, but we did not find any appreciable effect.
B.3 RAW audio: Natural speech
Our raw-audio benchmarks use the official Speech Commands v0.02 test archive, released under CC
BY 4.0. It contains 4,890 one-second mono recordings, encoded in WAV files, composed by ten target
commands together with unknown-word and silence examples.
24
schematic 32 × 32 RGB · HWC order
image
bytes
record
row 0
row 1
row 31
⋮
159
197
207
79
127
150
32 × 32 pixels × 3 channels × 1 byte = 3,072 bytes
R, G, B are adjacent for each pixel
Figure 9: Illustration of the interleaved (HWC) encoding, in which the RGB values of each pixel are
adjacent. The thumbnail and displayed byte values are schematic.
A WAV file mixes the waveform with a header, and its samples are signed 16-bit little-endian values.
We discard the header, paths, category labels, and other metadata. Each amplitudes is clipped to
the PCM16 range and mapped to the unsigned byte ⌊(s+ 32768)/256⌋ , so zero amplitude becomes
128 and neighboring bytes remain neighboring points in time.
We provide three versions of the same recordings. The 16 kHz version quantizes the original samples
directly. For the 8- and 4 kHz versions, fixed anti-aliasing filters downsample each recording
independently by factors of two and four before the same quantization. These benchmarks test
short-time acoustic prediction. With context length 256, each record contains 255 consecutive
waveform bytes. The 255 bytes span 15.94 ms at 16 kHz, 31.88 ms at 8 kHz, and 63.75 ms at 4 kHz.
Reducing the sample rate sacrifices high-frequency detail but exposes a longer interval to the same
bounded-context model.
B.4 Music
Raw audio is physically direct but temporally expensive. PCM8 sampled at 16 kHz consumes
16,000 bytes per second; even the repository’s 4 kHz PCM8 variant consumes 4,000 bytes per second.
So even a 4096 context length is only able to understand local features. Symbolic score music
representation is instead much more compact. At four bytes per quarter note, 255 bytes represent
63.75 quarter-note grid units. They may contain several phrases or a substantial portion of a
movement rather than a fraction of one acoustic event.
To construct this benchmark, we used the Mutopia project data. The Mutopia Project is a volunteer
collection of open sheet music written in LilyPond and based on editions in the public domain
contributors. Its contribution pages provide downloadable notation, PDF, and MIDI artifacts together
with source, maintainer, typesetting, and license .
From the full Mutopia project, we took a selection of 40 highly recognizable Western classical
pieces under Public Domain license, including familiar pieces by Beethoven, Mozart, Bach, Chopin,
Debussy, Schubert, Tchaikovsky, and others. A Standard MIDI File serializes a technical event
stream rather than a direct sequence of musical states. It can contain a header, format and track
declarations, variable-length delta encodings, tempo events, time signatures, program changes,
channels, velocities, controllers, text, copyright notices, names, and end-of-track events. Two files
25
representing substantially the same score can differ in many raw bytes because of exporter, track
layout, event ordering, and metadata choices. We stripped all this data, retaining only the melodies.
To convert the complex music information in the MIDI melodies into a simple "time-sequence" byte
encoding, we quantized the scores in 16th notes, each byte in the benchmark corresponding the state
of that time grid cell: either a new note, a continuation of the previous one, or a silence. The selected
track need not be monophonic. The benchmark creates a monophonic output by choosing at most
one active source note in every grid cell.
We use byte value 0-127 to encode the absolute MIDI pitch . MIDI pitch is an absolute semitone
number: 60 is middle C, 61 is C-sharp/D-flat, 62 is D, 63 is D-sharp/E-flat, 64 is E, and 67 is G. Byte
value 128 represents continuing holding the previous note in the current byte cell, 129 represents a
pause, and 130 denotes the end of a piece. In this benchmark, the bytes 131-255 are unused.
1 cell = 1/16 note
notes
byte
duration
♭
67
128
67
128
67
128
63
128
128
128
128
128
128
128
G4 · 2 cells
G4 · 2 cells
G4 · 2 cells
E♭4 · 8 cells
pitch onset (0–127)
hold previous note (128)
Figure 10: Qualitative illustration of the melody byte encoding using the opening motif of
Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony. Each cell is one sixteenth note: bytes 0–127 start a pitch, while
byte 128 holds the previous note.
Together with the benchmark data, we provide MIDI files reconstructed from this simplified byte
encoding, which we used to check the main themes were still recognizable.
We truncated the longer pieces to 4095 bytes.
B.5 DNA
To construct this benchmark, we used the large DNA dataset released with the KoLMogorov Test
Yoran et al. [2025]. The original test asks code-generating models to produce short programs
that reproduce a sequence exactly. Here we reuse only its released DNA sequences for ordinary
next-symbol prediction, and refer to the resulting benchmark askolmogorov_dna.
The KoLMogorov paper describes this stream as derived from GRCh38, the curated human reference
assembly NCBI. A reference assembly is a composite sequence assembled and maintained as a
common coordinate system; it is not a file of raw sequencing reads or the observed genome of one
person. The source retains upper- and lower-case versions of the four bases A, C, G, and T as eight
distinct symbols. Lower-case sequence is commonly used for soft masking, which marks repetitive
or low-complexity regions while retaining the underlying base. The released dna.bin contains the
numeric values 0-7, using the encoding
07→a,17→c,27→t,37→g,47→A,57→C,67→T,77→G.
26
From the large release, we retain its first 32 MiB numeric symbols. We divide this prefix without
overlap into 131,586 consecutive records of 255 symbols, discarding the final tail. A predictor told
that only eight values are possible could obtain 3 BPB by assigning them equal probability, whereas
a uniform prediction over the learner’s full 256-byte output space costs 8 BPB. The learner must
therefore recognize the compact alphabet as well as exploit local base composition, masking runs,
repeats, and motifs visible within 255 symbols.
B.6 Formal mathematics: Metamath
To construct this benchmark, we used a fixed revision of set.mm, the main Metamath database
Metamath contributors. Metamath provides a simple language for writing and checking mathe-
matical proofs. The database contains declarations of symbols, hypotheses, axioms, and theorem
statements with their proofs. Proofs refer to earlier statements by their labels and are stored in a
compressed form, using compact character strings to encode the proof steps.
We remove the comments delimited by $( and $), including explanatory prose, and discard empty
lines. Within each remaining line, we replace runs of whitespace by a single space, remove leading
and trailing whitespace, and end the line with one newline byte. We retain the formal content in its
source order, including the statement labels, formulas, and compressed proofs. The resulting text is
represented directly by its ASCII byte values, with spaces and newlines included in the sequence.
With context length 256, we divide this stream without overlap into 143,166 consecutive records
of 255 bytes, discarding the final 176 bytes. The windows can cross line, statement, and proof
boundaries. The predictor therefore has to exploit regularities such as recurring syntax, formula
fragments, labels, and patterns in the compressed proofs through the same byte interface used for
every other benchmark. This tests next-byte prediction of formal mathematical text; the model is not
asked to construct or verify a proof.
B.7 C source code
To construct this benchmark, we used file B from the Algorithmic Information Theory Data Compres-
sion Challenge (AITDCC) AITDCC. The challenge compares lossless compressors across different
kinds of data. Here we reuse its released C source for next-byte prediction. We extract the complete
file from a fixed revision of the official AITDCC archive; it contains 1,168,767 bytes of source text.
The source is ASCII text, and we retain its original byte values. Comments, copyright notices,
preprocessor directives, identifiers, and literals remain, together with indentation, tabs, spaces,
blank lines, and newlines. We do not parse or compile the source, normalize its formatting, or use a
C-specific tokenizer. The predictor receives the original text as one continuous byte stream.
With context length 256, we divide this stream without overlap into 4,583 consecutive records of
255 bytes, discarding the final 102 bytes. The windows follow byte positions and can cross line,
statement, function, and source-file boundaries. The predictor therefore has to exploit regularities
such as C syntax, recurring identifiers, comments, and formatting through the same byte interface
used for every other benchmark. Repeated names and code patterns provide structure beyond
individual characters, while comments also retain the spelling and local syntax of natural language.
C Emergent Mathematical Structure
During self-play, the generator discovers programs whose output tapes exhibit recognizable math-
ematical structure. We search the generated programs from our model-scaling experiments for
27
five families of sequences: arithmetic, quadratic, and cubic sequences; Fibonacci-like sequences;
and geometric sequences. Generated programs from the self-play runs were retained only once
every 256 training rounds, so discovery times can be measured only at this 256-round resolution. In
contrast, the uniform-sampling baseline described below checks programs at every round. Thus the
performance gap between self-play and the random baseline is likely even wider, as the reported
self-play discovery rounds are therefore conservative upper bounds on the true first occurrence of
each structure. Table 3 summarizes the observed families and compares their discovery times with
uniform program sampling.
Detection criteria.We allow up to 30 unrelated leading bytes before the structured portion of a tape
begins. The remainder of the tape must satisfy the corresponding recurrence modulo 256. Arithmetic,
quadratic, and cubic sequences are defined by constant first, second, and third finite differences,
respectively, with a sequence assigned to the lowest-order family it satisfies. Fibonacci-like sequences
satisfy
vn =v n−1 +v n−2 (mod 256),
for an arbitrary seed pair, while geometric sequences satisfy
vn =rv n−1 (mod 256)
for some integer ratior.
To eliminate degenerate matches, we additionally require a minimal period of at least 30, evaluated
both over the full matched region and over its trailing window. This excludes, for example, sequences
with a structured transient followed by a constant tail.
Family
(mod 256) Example program Its output Earliest
round
E[first round]
(univ. prior)
ArithmeticS+[.++]1,3,5,7,9, . . .0≈105
FibonacciS,[[.C>.C>]1,1,2,3,5, . . .512>53,000
GeometricS+[.L>]1,3,9,27,81, . . .256>53,000
QuadraticS,.[<C>>VX<RX++]9,25,59,111, . . .512>53,000
CubicS+[[-.L>L>-]-]0,254,236,74, . . .512>53,000
Table 3: Mathematical sequence families discovered in our scaling experiments. Self-play programs
were retained once every 256 rounds, so the reported discovery rounds are the earliest saved rounds
at which each family was observed.
Comparison with uniform program sampling.To estimate how readily the same structures
would be discovered without self-play, we sample programs by uniformly sampling the primitive
augmented alphabet until an “F" symbol is drawn. We draw 1.64×10 8 programs in total. A sample
is counted as a hit whenever its output satisfies the same family-level detection criterion above; it
need not match the example program shown in Table 3.
For comparison with the scaling experiments, we group samples at the same rate of 1,024 newly
generated programs per round. Unlike the self-play analysis, however, the uniform baseline
is checked at every round rather than only once every 256 rounds. The comparison therefore
underestimates the gap.
The arithmetic family occurs 1,526 times in the uniform baseline, giving an estimated probability of
9.3×10 −6 and an expected first-discovery round of approximately 105 (95% CI: 100–111).
28
We observe no Fibonacci, geometric, quadratic, or cubic matches in the 1.64×10 8 baseline samples.
By the rule of three, this gives the one-sided 95% bound
p≤1.8×10 −8,
corresponding to an expected first-discovery round greater than 53,000 at 1,024 programs per round.
Despite the coarser observation schedule for self-play, all four families are observed there by round
512, compared with no occurrences in more than 53,000 rounds’ worth of uniformly sampled
programs. Because all four families have zero observed baseline hits, however, the sampling
experiment establishes only a common lower bound on their rarity and does not determine their
relative frequencies.
D ICL Tasks
Each ICL task has the form
0, x1
1, . . . , x1
k, f(x1
1...k)

, . . . ,

0, xm
1 , . . . , xm
k , f(xm
1...k)

,

0, xm+1
1 , xm+1
2 , . . . , xm+1
k ,•].(14)
Each example is prepended by a sentinel ’0’ byte and is followed by the k inputs bytes and then the
function applied to those bytes (brackets are for visual separation and do not appear in the actual
byte sequence). After m examples are shown the next example sentinel and input are passed to the
model which fills in its prediction. The score for the model is the probability that it predicts the
correct token,f(x m+1
1...k ).
We takefto range over the tasks
1.REVERSE STRING: Given a wordx 1x2 · · ·xk reverse it.f(x 1, x2 . . . xk) = (xk, xk−1, dotsx1)
2. Stack: given a series of stack operations return the result after a final pop. Stack operations
are either push, or pop, sampled with equal probabilities when the stack height is at least one.
Push and pop are represented by the bytes 250 and 251 respectively. The byte after is either
the argument for push, or the result for pop. Example 250,1,250,2,251,2,250,3,251 would be
followed by3.
3. ASSOCIATIVE RECALLis a dictionary association task. The dictionary has size V and maps
bytes from 1−255 to bytes from 1−255 (repetition allowed). The dictionary is first printed in
the form of key-value pairs in the format of eq. (14) so that all pairs are visible to the model.
Evaluation proceeds in a similar manner, with random key-value pairs sampled and presented
to the model. Pairs are drawn at random after the initial print and do repeat.
4. SUMis the task of summing two bytesmod 256. The format is [0, x1, x2,(x 1 +x 2)mod256] .
x1, x2 ̸= 0.
5. MAX/MINare the task of finding the min and max over the k input bytes. That is f(x 1, . . . xk) =
min(x1, . . . xk)and similarly for max.
E Brainf*ck details
The generator produces programs in a minimal Turing complete language. We use a Brainf*ck3-like
universal machine, similar to the variant introduced in Grau-Moya et al. [2024], whose eight single-
character instructions move the head between cells (<, >), increment or decrement the cell under it
(+,-), loop ([,]), and read or write bytes (,and.).
Programs are strings over the alphabet A={<,>,+,-,[,],.,,,F} of this machine U, where F is an
explicit end-of-program token. A program x∈ A≤L is executed on U under a bounded step and
3For completeness, this stands for Brainfuck.
29
memory budget, with tape cells taken modulo a fixed modulus m= 256 ; the input instruction (,)
reads i.i.d. uniform random bytes from a random tape ω, so execution defines an output distribution
per program. The output
y=U(x, ω)∈ {0, . . . , m−1}T
is the sequence of the firstTbytes the program emits, zero-padded if it halts early.
As an example, the following program implements a three-iteration for loop, using its first cell as
the loop counter and emitting its second cell once per iteration:
+++|{z}
cell0 ←3
[|{z}
while cell0̸=0
>+.|{z}
cell1←cell1+1;emit cell 1
<-|{z}
cell0←cell0−1
]|{z}
end loop
F|{z}
halt
It emitsy= (1,2,3,0, . . . ,0): one byte per iteration, then zero-padding once the program halts.
Importantly,everystring over A is executable. There is no syntax error: the only way a program
can be malformed is through unmatched brackets, which we treat as no-ops. In practice we cannot
implement an unbounded tape or unbounded run times, so our machine has finite memory and
finite time budgets; wherever a program exceeds one of these bounds, the semantics are defined
to wrap or halt rather than fault. The tape is circular, so that a head move off either end of the
finite memory wraps around, and incrementing or decrementing a cell wraps modulo m. As a
consequence, there are no out of bounds errors. Execution always terminates — at the step budget,
the end of the program, or theT-th emitted byte, whichever comes first.
The machine as described is Turing complete using the eight Brainf*ck instructions alone. In practice,
however, common patterns such as clearing a cell, moving a value to a neighbor, or scanning to the
next zero cell are frequently used in human written Brainf*ck programs, and appear to increase the
efficiency of self-play in preliminary experiments. We therefore extend the alphabet with the ten
single-character tokens in table 4. All methods we compare draw from this same augmented alphabet,
including the Solomonoff-prior baseline in section 3.1 and the uniform-sampling comparison, so the
added primitives cannot account for any difference between self-play and its controls. Several of the
discovered program families in table 3 use these tokens.
Token Expansion Effect on tape
Z[-]Clear current cell
R[->+<]Clear and addxinto right neighbor
L[->+++<]Clear and add3xinto right neighbor
N[-<->]Clear and subtractxfrom left neighbor
C[->+>+«]Clear and addxinto the two right cells
G[>]Scan right to next zero cell
H[<]Scan left to next zero cell
W[[-]>+<]If current̸=0: increment right and clear current
V[.>]Print stored string until a zero cell
X[-]++++++++++++++++Set cell to 16
Table 4: The set of characters used to augment the Brainf*ck language, their expansion in terms of
pure Brainf*ck, and their meaning.xcorresponds to the value at the current memory cell.
F Reward Ablations Table
To support our choice of reward we show several ablations along with variants of the real reward.
The "none" reward is the canonical setup, which as we have seen is already better than the "uniform"
30
ablation
dataset None uniform signed shuffle last_step b loss_delta a,b negate
text (dclm) 5.34 7.755.065.96 6.39 7.40 10.62
Metamath3.387.39 3.47 4.39 4.34 6.46 10.52
C source 4.16 7.924.104.79 4.95 6.37 10.60
DNA (8-symbol)2.293.02 2.45 2.50 3.22 3.57 8.37
arithmetic0.227.94 0.51 0.73 1.26 1.92 10.64
audio 8-bit PCM2.273.93 2.45 2.91 3.39 3.67 7.67
audio 16-bit PCM5.026.08 5.24 5.79 5.97 6.32 9.02
melody (Mutopia)2.207.09 2.21 3.26 3.35 4.14 11.00
CIFAR-10 (planar)5.967.83 6.14 7.14 7.22 7.59 10.59
random bytes8.02 8.028.058.028.29 8.61 10.57
Table 5:Reward ablations of the self-play generatorat the 1M parameter model. Each entry
shows the validation loss in bits per byte of the 4-seed ensemble on 256 held-out sequences per
dataset, scored from the final-round checkpoints. Every ablation changes exactly one property of
the canonical reward ri =|⟨P⊙ ∇L(yi;θ now), θpast −θ now⟩| with θpast =θ ⌊e/2⌋ (None).Signeddrops
the absolute value,shufflepermutes the rewards across the program pool,last_stepuses the one-step
window θpast =θ e−1,loss_deltauses the realized progress Li(θpre)−L i(θpost),negateflips the reward’s
sign, anduniformremoves the generator entirely (i.i.d. uniform programs). On the majority of
datasets, the canonical reward is best, or nearly best, and it often has lower variance as well.
a One loss_delta seed stopped at round 2587 and is excluded; its ensemble is over 3 seeds.
b last_step and loss_delta are bimodal across seeds (e.g. dclm single-seed 6.4 / 6.5 vs 10.6 / 11.1 for
last_step; 7.0 vs 9.8 / 12.3 for loss_delta); their ensembles average over the diverged seeds.
ablation where we set the generator to sample program tokens uniformly from the alphabet. Ad-
ditionally we consider a signed version of the reward which does worse than the absolute value,
which shows that the absolute value is useful. When we shuffle the reward between programs of
the same batch we break the correlation, and see a much worse result demonstrating that the mere
marginal distribution of rewards is not sufficient to drive progress.
The last step reward is evaluating against the one-step weight difference rather than taking a window
back to e/2 rounds, which is clearly worse, demonstrating that there is some value to averaging over
larger blocks. Additionally the loss delta, which is putatively similar to the last step reward (to first
order) is worse still, showing that the first-order reward is usefully more informative than the finite
difference.
Finally the negative of the reward shows performance worse than a randomly initialized model,
indicating that the reward does prefer systematically better programs to worse ones across the
board.
G Pool construction
At rounde, we construct a fixed pool of programs
Be =B fresh
e ˙∪ Bmut
e ˙∪ Breplay
e .
The fresh pool Bfresh
e consists of the latest programs sampled from the generator gϕ. A fraction
of on-policy samples is replaced by Bmut
e : single-token substitutions, insertions, or deletions of
31
positively rewarded programs drawn from the quality-diversity bank. The replay pool Breplay
e is
formed by drawing programs uniformly without replacement from the bank of non-replay programs
produced in earlier rounds. These programs are re-executed with fresh random tapes. Mutations
improve local exploration by making small edits to promising programs and replay mitigates
catastrophic forgetting of behaviors discovered in earlier rounds. For mutation, we use a MAP-
Elites-style algorithm [Mouret and Clune, 2015], so that mutation does not concentrate exclusively
on the highest-reward programs. Concretely, each program is assigned to a niche according to
two descriptors: (i) its maximum dynamic loop depth, binned from 0 through 8 with larger depths
clamped to the final bin, and (ii) its program-body length, bucketed at 8, 16, and 32 tokens. This
produces at most 36 niches in total. Only programs receiving positive generator reward are admitted
to the archive, and within each niche we retain the top 8 programs according to their stored reward.
Because the usefulness of a program depends on the learner’s current state, stored rewards are
decayed by a factor of 0.97 each round, allowing newly useful programs to replace stale elites.
Mutation parents are selected uniformly across occupied niches, rather than uniformly across all
archived programs, preserving representation for rarer structural behaviors such as deeply nested
programs.
H Random-PCFG pretraining
Grammar sampling.Each grammar G= (V,Σ, R, S)is drawn as follows. The terminal set Σ is a
uniform sample, without replacement, of nΣ ∼ U {2, . . . ,16}distinct byte values from {1, . . . ,255}
(byte 0 is reserved as padding and never emitted). The grammar has |V| ∼ U {1, . . . ,8}non-
terminals with start symbol S=V 0. Each non-terminal receives U {1, . . . ,4}productions; production
probabilities are i.i.d. U(0,1) weights (plus 10−6), normalized to sum to one. Each right-hand side
contains U {1, . . . ,4}symbols, each independently a terminal with probability pT = 0.5 (uniform
over Σ) and otherwise a uniform non-terminal.Productivity repair:if a non-terminal ends up with
no terminal-only production, the right-hand side of one uniformly chosen production is replaced
by a freshly sampled terminal-only string (its probability unchanged), so every non-terminal can
terminate in one step.
Derivation and row packing.A word is derived by leftmost expansion with an explicit stack,
sampling productions by their probabilities, and stops when the stack empties, the output reaches
64 bytes, or 104 expansions elapse (a backstop for grammars with unbounded expected yield); if
expansion produces no terminal, the start symbol’s stored one-step terminal yield is emitted, so
every word has ≥1 byte. For each 4,095-byte training row,onefresh grammar is sampled and words
are derived from it and concatenated until the row fills (the final word is truncated). Rows therefore
contain repeated material from a single small random grammar and are zero-free by construction.
32